Amanda Owen and ex's unusual living arrangement as she still makes his food

Clive Owen revealed his ex-wife Amanda Owen still "cooks all his meals" even after they ended their 22-year marriage

Amanda Owen 's ex-husband Clive Owen spoke out on his split from The Yorkshire Shepherdess on Lorraine on Wednesday as he shared their living arrangements since they called time on their marriage.

Our Yorkshire Farm star Clive spoke to Christine Lampard as he set the record straight about the reasons behind their separation.

Clive also explained that despite their separation, they live close to each other and are still in each other's lives.

He said: "I live at the farm and she lives about half a mile away down the road. On a day-to-day basis, we work together, we farm together, we look after the kids together. She feeds us all, somehow she looks after two houses instead of one."

"So I think, although it's been unfortunate, I really believe the kids are great and fine," he added.

Opening up on their split, Clive said: "It's a tough time for Amanda now. One of the things that I hear is people saying, 'Poor Clive' and I feel that that isn't right."

"It's been really upsetting," he continued. "Amanda's having a tough time at the moment and I just feel that I can't just sit back and watch all this happening without saying something in her defence.

"She's a remarkable woman. I made a complete mess of it. We got to a point where we couldn't be together anymore. If I'd supported her and looked after her, I'm sure things would have been much different. We were under pressure. It was crazy, for very ordinary people, all this going on."

"We got to a point where we couldn't get along at all and we parted… Very sad but that's how it is.

Describing how filming their Channel 5 show had changed the couple's lives, he said "It was amazing and successful, I handled it very badly. It was such a change in our life and I sadly made a right mess of things basically and I had a massive part to play in our relationship ending."

"We were all committed to this thing [programme] and it seemed to eat away at me. I handled it badly and I behaved badly towards her. Because I should have been supportive and I was doing the absolutely opposite," he added.

The Our Yorkshire Farm stars split last year and it's recently been reported that Amanda has subsequently moved on with businessman Robert Davies, who she has known for five years.

A source claimed to The Sun : "Amanda and Robert have known each other many years - long before her split. Now he travels everywhere with her and they've become seemingly inseparable." 