Rory McIlroy with wife for first time after divorce U-turn hours after US Open

PGA Tour star Rory McIlroy was spotted with Erica Stoll shortly after his US Open heartbreaker to Bryson DeChambeau, with the couple seemingly in good spirits despite the divorce U-Turn

Rory McIlroy was back in the presence of wife Erica Stoll just hours after the final round of the U.S. Open, which ended in heartbreak for the Northern Irishman.

Hours after his crushing defeat - being beaten by LIV Golf star Bryson DeChambeau by one shot after a tense finish - the 35-year-old PGA Golf star was spotted spending time with Stoll and their daughter, Poppy. Their appearance together is the latest chapter in the stunning divorce U-Turn he performed last week and the first time they have been pictured together publicly since that news emerged on the eve of the tournament.

After announcing he would be calling off the divorce, McIlroy explained what went into his decision to attempt to repair the damage that caused the filing in the first place. "There have been rumours about my personal life recently, which is unfortunate," McIlroy said at the time, per The Guardian. "Responding to each rumour is a fool's game.

READ MORE: Rory McIlroy returns to mansion shared with Erica Stoll just hours after US Open agony
READ MORE: Rory McIlroy and Erica Stoll held four private meetings at their Florida mansion to save marriage

"Over the past weeks, Erica and I have realised that our best future was as a family together. Thankfully, we have resolved our differences and look forward to a new beginning."

Despite what the golf star said, others in his close circle reportedly believe that McIlroy's decision to call off the divorce was because of the financials involved. Sources close to McIlroy spoke to the Daily Mail and revealed that the Northern Irishman could see much of his wealth go to lawyer fees and other expenses. "Perhaps, the cold realisation of exactly how much the divorce could cost him hit hard," a source explained.

For all the latest on news, politics, sports, and showbiz from the USA, go to The Mirror US.

"McIlroy has amassed a fortune of more than £200m and his projected earnings in his career are predicted to be more than double that figure." Additionally, it was said that the coming months for McIlroy and Stoll will be very important in terms of how their relationship will progress.

"It's a cooling off period and the next six months will be telling as to whether they can properly patch up the relationship. There is also their three-year-old daughter Poppy to consider. Rory is a doting dad and he has strong family values," the source continued. Still, it appears the two have been doing their part to make the relationship work.

McIlroy quickly returned to his home in Florida, which he shared with Stoll, just hours after his crushing end to the US Open. It comes after divorce papers filed just weeks ago claimed the relationship was "irreversibly broken."

What's more, it was alleged that the couple held a series of secret meetings in an attempt to repair the relationship. The Irish Independent reported that the two met at least four times to help repair the damage the relationship had sustained. 

Stoll reportedly turned down meeting with a lawyer and spoke at length with McIlroy weekly, which in turn helped saved the marriage. She is now by his side as he processes another near-miss in a major which will be hard to take.

McIlroy was inches from ending his 10-year wait for another victory on the major stage. DeChambeau would win the tournament by just one shot after two costly missed chances from the Northern Irishman.

 Most notably, McIlroy missed a putt from inside three feet, the first time he had done that in almost 500 attempts this year. On the 18th, McIlroy had another short miss, which would be the killing blow for his chances to win.

After seeing DeChambeau make his shot, McIlroy quickly left Pinehurst. DeChambeau shared some words of support for McIlroy, stating: "Rory is one of the best to ever play. Being able to fight against a great like that is pretty special. For him to miss that putt, I'd never wish it on anybody. It just happened to play out that way."

"He'll win multiple more major championships. There's no doubt. I think that firein him is going to continue to grow."