Prince Harry and Meghan 'to miss out on Met Gala invite amid Royal drama'

Meghan Markle and Prince Harry could be snubbed at this year's 'prestigious' Met Gala event, which is due to take place five days before King Charles' Coronation

Meghan Markle and Prince Harry could miss out on an invite to this year's Met Gala event amid their ongoing "drama" with the Royal Family.

The annual fundraising gala is set to be "Hollywood's most prestigious red carpet event", but the Duke and Duchess of Sussex "aren't likely to attend".

The Met Gala will be taking place just five days before King Charles' Coronation, with Harry and Meghan's rift with the royal family leaving them off the guestlist, according to a PR expert.

Jordan James, CEO of Unlockd PR said: "It certainly wouldn't come as a major surprise if they were snubbed given their current status within the Royal Family and the ensuing drama."

Jordan said if Meghan and Harry do manage to get an invite to the Met Gala, it could "boost their public perception in America".

However, he said they're likely to turn down an invite if they do receive one.

"They aren't likely to attend as they will undoubtedly face scrutiny, no matter how hard they may try to minimise fallout - especially with how close this event is to the Royal Coronation," he said.

The Duke and Duchess of Sussex were also no-shows at this year's Oscars, with Jordan saying there seems to have been a "shift" in how they're presenting themselves.

 "While the couple isn't always known for laying low, I think we are beginning to see a shift in how they want to be presented - whether this is truly by choice though we may never know, he told the Express.

Harry and Meghan aren't the only ones at risk of not being invited to the Met Gala, with the Kardashian family said to have been cut from the guest list as Vogue editor Anna Wintour "cracks down" on who can attend.

Kim Kardashian stole the show at the Met Gala last year as she rocked up in Marilyn Monroe's iconic gold dress. 

The 42-year-old attended last year's event as well as her sisters Khloe, Kourtney, Kendall and Kylie.

Speaking to Page Six, the insider said Anna had been "cracking down on the guests at the annual fashion fete and no Kardashians will make the cut".

However, a source close to the Kardashians later claimed to the publication this was not the case.