Experts Warn Alex Jones Show Trial Sets Precedent for Silencing Independent Media

Legal experts are warning that the show trial against Alex Jones will set the precedent to silence independent media and shut down any opinions or commentary that goes against the mainstream media narrative. 

Revolver News founder Darrin J. Beattie, constitutional lawyer Robert Barnes, lawyer Mike Cernovich, Human Events editor Jack Posobiec, and many others all warned that the Texas defamation trial against Infowars founder Alex Jones is the first legal salvo against free speech and non-mainstream views.

"Regime is thirsting for a precedent in Alex Jones case so no one can question official narratives on the internet again," Beattie tweeted.

Infowars.com reports: "Alex Jones precedent means if you don't accept the Vegas shooting explanation, then FBI agents can sue you because you're calling them liars by implication," Cernovich noted. "Conservative media doesn't seem to care. They aren't saying a word on the due process violations in Jones case."

"The Alex Jones show trial is a preview of what the regime intends to do to anyone and everyone who doesn't conform with The Narratives," journalist Jordan Schachtel said.

"Alex Jones case is to use it as precedent to go after those who contest 2020 election & any other government disfavored 'conspiracy minded' folks, like everyone who challenged lockdowns, mandates, Covid origins, lies to get us into war," Barnes pointed out after noting a juror asked the court if the lawsuit against Jones can "stop election deniers" in future cases.

In fact, the New York Times this week confirmed the alarming hypothesis, admitting that the establishment's goal is to "send a signal to other conspiracy purveyors about the cost of online lies" using the legal system.

Keep in mind, the NYT didn't consider the Russia collusion hoax, Jussie Smollett's hate crime hoax, the Nick Sandmann incident, the Kyle Rittenhouse case, or Hunter Biden's laptop as "Russian disinformation" to be media-driven lies at all — though all of them demonstrably were at the time.

A verdict in Jones' Texas defamation show trial is expected later this week.